## C9.2.52 BFTMOPA (widening)

BFloat16 sparse sum of outer products to single-precision, accumulating

This instruction generates BFloat16 sum of outer products by multiplying the 2-in-4 selected elements from the dense sub-matrices in the two first source vectors with the corresponding elements of the compressed sparse sub-matrix in the second source vector and accumulates the results to the corresponding elements of a 32-bit element ZA tile.

The sum of outer products is generated by multiplying the selected 2-in-4 BFloat16 values from each overlapping 32-bit containers of the two SVLS × 2 sub-matrices in the first source vectors by the two BFloat16 values from the corresponding 32-bit container of the 2 × SVLS sub-matrix in the second source vector. The two selected elements from each overlapping 32-bit containers of the first source vectors correspond to 2-in-4 elements of rows of two SVLS × 2 sub-matrices. Each 32-bit container of the second source vector holds 2 elements of columns of a compressed 2 × SVLS sub-matrix.

The 2-in-4 BFloat16 values from overlapping 32-bit containers of the first source vectors are selected by 4-bit controls in the indexed segment of the control vector register. If the control bit corresponding to an element in the first source vectors is 0, the element is discarded and does not contribute to the sum of products result. If more than two bits of the 4-bit control corresponding to 32-bit containers of the first source vectors are 1, only the elements corresponding to the least two significant bits are selected.

The instruction widens the selected elements of sub-matrices of BFloat16 values held in the first source vectors to single-precision values and multiplies them by the corresponding widened elements of sub-matrix of BFloat16 values in the second source vector to single-precision values. The resulting SVLS × SVLS single-precision sum of outer products is then destructively added to the single-precision destination tile. This is equivalent to performing a 2-way dot product and accumulate to each of the destination tile elements.

This instruction follows SME BFloat16 numerical behaviors.

This instruction is unpredicated.

## SME2

(FEAT\_SME\_TMOP)

<!-- image -->

| 31 30   | 29 28                  | 25 24 23 22 21 20 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9   |
|---------|------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| 1 0     | 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 Zm 0 | 0 0 K Zk Zn                                |

## Encoding

```
BFTMOPA <ZAda>.S, { <Zn1>.H-<Zn2>.H }, <Zm>.H, <Zk>[<index>]
```

## Decode for this encoding

```
if !IsFeatureImplemented(FEAT_SME_TMOP) then EndOfDecode(Decode_UNDEF);
```

```
constant integer n = UInt(Zn:'0'); constant integer m = UInt(Zm); constant integer k = UInt('1':K:'1':Zk); constant integer index = UInt(i2); constant integer da = UInt(ZAda);
```

## Assembler Symbols

## &lt;ZAda&gt;

Is the name of the ZA tile ZA0-ZA3, encoded in the 'ZAda' field.

## &lt;Zn1&gt;

Is the name of the first scalable vector register of the first source multi-vector group, encoded as 'Zn' times 2.

## &lt;Zn2&gt;

Is the name of the second scalable vector register of the first source multi-vector group, encoded as 'Zn' times 2 plus 1.

## &lt;Zm&gt;

Is the name of the second source scalable vector register, encoded in the 'Zm' field.

## &lt;Zk&gt;

Is the name of the control vector register Z20-Z23 or Z28-Z31, encoded in the 'K:Zk' fields.

## &lt;index&gt;

Is the control segment index, in the range 0 to 3, encoded in the 'i2' field.

## Operation

```
CheckStreamingSVEAndZAEnabled(); constant integer VL = CurrentVL; constant integer dim = VL DIV 32; constant integer csize = VL DIV 8; constant bits(VL) op2 = Z[m, VL]; constant bits(VL) op3 = Z[k, VL]; constant bits(csize) ctrl = Elem[op3, index, csize]; constant bits(dim*dim*32) op4 = ZAtile[da, 32, dim*dim*32]; bits(dim*dim*32) result; for row = 0 to dim-1 for col = 0 to dim-1 integer i = 0; array [0..1] of bits(16) erow; erow[0] = BFZero('0', 16); erow[1] = BFZero('0', 16); for r = 0 to 1 constant bits(VL) op1 = Z[n+r, VL]; for e = 0 to 1 if i < 2 && Elem[ctrl, 4*col + 2*r + e, 1] == '1' then erow[i] = Elem[op1, 2*row + e, 16]; i = i + 1; array [0..1] of bits(16) ecol; ecol[0] = Elem[op2, 2*col + 0, 16]; ecol[1] = Elem[op2, 2*col + 1, 16]; constant bits(32) sum = Elem[op4, row*dim+col, 32]; Elem[result, row*dim+col, 32] = BFDotAdd(sum, erow[0], erow[1], ecol[0], ecol[1], ZAtile[da, 32, dim*dim*32] = result;
```

```
FPCR);
```