## D13.4 Attributability

An event caused by the PE counting the event is Attributable . If an agent other than the PE that is counting the events causes an event, these events are Unattributable.

An event is defined as being either Attributable or Unattributable. If the event is Attributable, it is further defined whether it is Attributable to:

- The current Security state of the PE.
- The current Exception level of the PE.
- When the PE is in Debug state, operations issued to the PE by the debugger through the external debug interface.

In a multithreaded implementation, an event might be generated by another PE with the same values for affinity level 1 and higher. This event is further defined as Attributable to:

- The current Security state of that PE.
- The current Exception level of that PE.
- When that PE is in Debug state, operations issued to that PE by the debugger through the external debug interface.

See Multithreaded implementations for information about enabling and restricting counting events in a multithreaded implementation.

Note

An implementation is described as multithreaded when the lowest level of affinity, as reported by MPIDR\_EL1{Aff3, Aff2, Aff1, Aff0}, consists of logical PEs that are implemented using a multithreading type approach. In this section, when referring to a multithreaded implementation, thread is used to mean processing elements with:

- MPIDR\_EL1.MT or MPIDR.MT set to 1,
- Different values for affinity level 0.
- The same values for affinity level 1 and higher.

An event can be defined as the combination of multiple subevents, which can be either Attributable or Unattributable.

All architecturally defined events are Attributable, unless otherwise stated.

Unattributable events might be counted when Attributable events are not counted. See:

- Interaction with EL3.
- Event filtering.
- Performance Monitors and Debug state.
- Counting events from shared components.

These sections are summarized by Table D13-3 for events Attributable to the processor, and Unattributable events. Table D13-3 entries apply when the counter and PMU are enabled and not frozen. Otherwise, events are not counted.

## Table D13-3 Counting events

| State      | Allowed or prohibited   | Filtered     | Event type If Attributable to:   | Then         | Else                   |
|------------|-------------------------|--------------|----------------------------------|--------------|------------------------|
| Non- debug | Allowed                 | Not filtered | X                                | Count        | Count                  |
|            |                         | Filtered     | Current Exception level          | Do not count | IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED |

| State   | Allowed or prohibited   | Filtered   | Event type If Attributable to:    | Then         | Else                   |
|---------|-------------------------|------------|-----------------------------------|--------------|------------------------|
|         | Prohibited              | X          | Current Security state            | Do not count | IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED |
| Debug   | X                       | X          | Debugger operations or raw cycles | Do not count | IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED |